---
layout: resources-layout
title: injury
full-title: Injury and Healing Reference
category: resources-sheets
description: "Tables and rules reference for injury and healing in "
keywords: "rpg, rules, combat, injury, healing, tabletop rpg rules, "
permalink: resources/sheets/injury/
---

<p>This page presents summarized rules and tables for injury and healing in <em>Dungeons of Olde</em>.</p>

<h2>Injury Status</h2>
<p>Physical injury to characters is tracked by deducting points from their current Hit Point total. At any time, each character has one of five statuses, based on his current Hit Points.</p>

{% include tables/injury-statuses-table.html %}

<h2>Conditions Imposed by Injury</h2>

<h5>Stunned</h5>
<p>Taking more than 50% of maximum Hit Points from a single injury may cause a character to become <em>stunned</em>.

<h5>Dying</h5>
<p>A character who takes sufficient damage to fall to or below 0 Hit Points is <em>dying</em>. He is immediately <em>incapacitated</em>, and remains incapacitated until he heals to at least 1 HP. He is also <em>bleeding</em>, and will continue to lose an additional 1 HP per reset until another until stabilized.</p>

<h5>Dead</h5>
<p>When a character's current Hit Points have been reduced to or below the inverse of his maximum HP value (or 0 - maximum HP), that character is <em>dead</em>. He may not be healed conventionally or magically, and may only be revived via resurrection.</p>

<h2>First Aid</h2>
<p>The Healing skill may be to administer first aid to an injured character in the field. Conscious patients may apply First Aid to themselves, but the challenge rating is raised by 1 rank. Persons untrained in the Healing skill take a -2 penalty to their Check roll when attempting to Heal.</p>

{% include tables/first-aid-table.html %}

<h2 class="new-page">Recuperation</h2>
<p>An injured character rolls a Brawn or Nerve Check once every 24 hours to recover lost HP through recuperation. The challenge rating for the Check is determined by the conditions under which the patient is recuperating. Each rank of success on the Check roll restores 1 HP, but no HP are lost if the roll is failed. Exceptional outcomes on Recuperation Checks do not award character points.</p>

{% include tables/recuperation-table.html %}

<p>A caregiver can improve an injured character's chance of regaining lost HP each day with a successful Healing Check. The challenge rating for the Healing Check is based on the patient's status; each rank of success gives the patient +1 on his Recuperation Check. Caregiver Healing checks do not award character points for exceptional outcomes.</p>

{% include tables/recuperation-caregiver-table.html %}