---
layout: rules-layout
title: combat
full-title: Combat
category: rules-core
description: "Rules for combat in "
keywords: "rpg stats, rpg combat, rpg rules, tabletop rpg rules "
permalink: /core-rules/combat/
---

<p>These rules first lay down the basics of melee combat, then present additional rules for <a href="#unarmed-combat">Brawling</a> (close combat, generally without weapons) and <a href="#ranged-combat">Ranged Attacks</a>.</p>

<h2>Attacking as an Opposed Attempt</h2>
<p>A basic melee attack is handled as an <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/challenges/#opposed-attempts">Opposed Attempt</a> to strike a target. The steps in resolving the attack are:</p>

<ol>
  <li><span id="attacker-declares-attack">The attacker declares his attack</span> against the defender, after verifying the following conditions:
    <ul class="bulleted circle">
      <li>The defender is within the <a href="#melee-weapons">Reach</a> or <a href="#ranged-weapons">Range</a> of his attack</li>
      <li>The attacker has clear or partial <a href="#line-of-sight">Line of Sight</a> to the defender</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><span id="defense-checks">The defender makes a <strong>Defense Check</strong></span> to avoid being hit
    <ol class="lower-alpha">
      <li>The defender rolls two exploding Finesse dice</li>
      <li>The defender adds his current Defense Adjustment<strong>&ast;</strong></li>
      <li>The resulting value is the CR for the attack</li>
    </ol>
  </li>
  <li><span id="attack-checks">The attacker makes an <strong>Attack Check</strong></span> to hit the defender
    <ol class="lower-alpha">
      <li>The attacker rolls two exploding <a href="#melee-weapons">Stat Dice appropriate for his weapon</a></li>
      <li>The attacker adds any Adjustments to the attack<strong>&ast;</strong> to the roll</li>
      <li>If the total equals or exceeds the CR set by the defender's roll, the Attack hits</li>
    </ol>
  </li>
  <li><span id="attack-hits">If the attack hits,</span> damage is resolved.
    <ol class="lower-alpha">
      <li>The attacker rolls the damage die for <a href="#melee-weapons">his weapon</a>. For <a href="#unarmed-combat">unarmed combat</a>, the attacker rolls his Brawn die and halves the result to find the damage inflicted.</li>
      <li>The attacker adds any Damage Adjustments<strong>&ast;</strong> to set the raw damage inflicted.</li>
      <li>The defender subtracts any Armor Adjustments<strong>&ast;</strong> from the raw damage to determine actual damage sustained.</li>
      <li>The defender deducts the damage sustained from his current <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#stats">Hit Points</a>.</li>
    </ol>
  </li>
</ol>
<p><em><strong>&ast;</strong> Defense, Attack, Damage and Armor Adjustments are typically made for conditions such as special skills or maneuvers, active spells or magic items, etc.</em></p>

<h5 id="line-of-sight">Line of Sight</h5>
<p>In order to attack an opponent, a character must be able to <em>see</em> his target (or in the case of invisible opponents, at least see the space where he <em>thinks</em> his target is!). In other words, he must have a <strong>line of sight</strong> (LoS) to his target.</p>

<p><strong>Clear LoS:</strong> If an unobstructed line can be drawn from the <em>center</em> of the attacker's space to the <em>center</em> of the target's space, the line of sight is clear, and the attacker takes no penalty to his Attack check.</p>

<p><strong>Partial LoS:</strong> If an unobstructed line can be drawn from the <em>center</em> of the attacker's space to <em>any point</em> in the target's space, the attacker has a partial line of sight, and takes a -3 Adjustment on his Attack check.</p>

<p><strong>Minimal LoS:</strong> If an unobstructed line can be drawn from <em>any point</em> in the attacker's space to <em>any point</em> in the target's space, the attacker has only a minimal line of sight, and takes a -6 Adjustment on his Attack check.</p>

<h2>Weapons</h2>

<h5>Melee Weapons</h5>
<div id="melee-weapons" class="ftrm-half">
  {% include tables/melee-weapons-table.html %}
</div>

<ul class="ftrm">
  <li><strong>Check Stat:</strong> The Primary Stat Dice used in <a href="#attack-checks">Attack Checks</a>.</li>
  <li><a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/skills/#skills">Skill:</a> The Weapon Skill required to wield the weapon without penalty; Attackers lacking the appropriate weapon skill suffer a -2 penalty to their Attack Check</li>
  <li><a href="#attacker-declares-attack"><span id="reach">Reach:</span></a> The distance, in spaces, at which the weapon can be used to attack
    <ul class="bulleted">
      <li><em>Reach 0:</em> Attacker and Defender in same space (HtH combat)</li>
      <li><em>Reach 1:</em> Attacker and Defender in adjacent spaces</li>
      <li><em>Reach 2 or 3:</em> Defender in the second or third space away from the Attacker</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><strong>1h and 2h Brawn Minimums:</strong> Minimum Brawn required to use the weapon in one hand (allowing another object to be held in the other hand or two hands (no other objects may be held in hands); for every point by which the Brawn Minimum exceeds the Attacker's Brawn, he suffers a penalty of -1 to all Attack Checks and Damage rolls.</li>
  <li><strong>Damage:</strong> Base damage inflicted by a normal weapon of the type wielded by a character meeting the Brawn Minimum; there is no bonus to damage for Attackers with a greater Brawn than their weapon's Brawn Minimum.</li>
</ul>

<h5 id="unarmed-combat">Unarmed Combat</h5>
<p>Unarmed attacks may be made at <a href="#reach">Reach 0 or 1</a>. Attacks with small improvised weapons, such as a beer mug, a roll of coins, or a fist-sized rock, also have a Reach of 0 or 1. Longer improvised weapons (axe handle, chair leg) are essentially clubs, and should be treated as <a href="#melee-weapons">Mace Skill</a> weapons of similar proportion.</p>
<p>To find the damage done by an unarmed blow, the attacker rolls his Brawn die and halves the result, rounding up. Small improvised weapons add 1 to the basic damage for an Unarmed Attack for every 5 full points of the Attacker's Brawn. Thus, a hero with Brawn 9 hits in unarmed combat, so he rolls his Brawn die and gets a 7. If he's punching bare-fisted, he does 4 points of damage (7/2 = 3.5, which rounds up to 4). If he's smacking his opponent with a beer stein, he does 5 points (the base 4, plus 1 for the improvised weapon, since he has more than 5 Brawn, but less than 10).</p>

<h5 id="ranged-combat">Ranged Combat</h5>

<p>Like Melee Combat, Ranged Combat is resolved as an <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/challenges/#opposed-attempts">Opposed Attempt</a>, with special Adjustments made to Attack Checks according to the <a href="#range">distance from the Attacker to the Defender</a>.</p>

<div id="ranged-weapons" class="ftrm-half">
{% include tables/ranged-weapons-table.html %}
</div>

<ul class="ftrm">
  <li><strong>Check Stat:</strong> All Ranged Weapons use Finesse dice in Attack Checks</li>
  <li><strong>Skill:</strong> The Weapon Skill required to wield the weapon without penalty (see Skills); Attackers lacking the appropriate weapon skill suffer a -2 penalty to their Attack Check</li>
  <li><strong><span id="range">Base Range:</span></strong> The distance, in spaces, within which the weapon is most effective
    <ul class="bulleted">
      <li>Within the base Range, Ranged Attack Checks take no penalty.</li>
      <li>Every doubling of the base Range imposes a penalty of -2 on the Attack Check.</li>
      <li>Ranged weapons may not be used to attack defenders in the same space as the attacker (0 Range).</li>
      <li>Ranged weapon attacks against defenders in spaces adjacent to the attacker (Range 1) take a -2 penalty to the Attack Check, unless the defender is motionless.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><strong>Range Limit:</strong> The maximum multiple of the Base Range at which the weapon may attack an individual target</li>
  <li><strong>Hands:</strong> The number of hands&mdash;one or two&mdash;necessary to ready, aim, and attack with the weapon</li>
  <li><strong>Brawn Minimums:</strong> Minimum Brawn required to use the weapon; for every point by which the Brawn Minimum exceeds the Attacker's Brawn, he suffers a penalty of -1 to all Attack Checks and Damage rolls. <em>Crossbows</em> have special rules regarding Brawn Minimums and Damage(see below).</li>
  <li><strong>Damage:</strong> Base damage inflicted by a normal weapon of the type wielded by a character meeting the Brawn Minimum; there is no bonus to damage for Attackers with a greater Brawn than their weapon's Brawn Minimum.</li>
</ul>

<h5>Shields</h5>
<p>Shields are used to block or deflect blows, applying a positive  <a href="#defense-checks">Adjustment to Defense</a>. Shields occupy the character's off hand, may not be used in conjunction with two-handed weapons, either Melee or Ranged.</p>

{% include tables/shields-table.html %}

<ul class="ftrm">
  <li><strong>Type:</strong> Listed shield types are representative; other types are possible</li>
  <li><strong>Defense Adjustment:</strong> The value added to the character's Defense</li>
  <li><strong>Brawn Minimum:</strong> Minimum Brawn to use the shield without penalty; for each point the character's Brawn is below the Brawn Minimum, he suffers an <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/dice/#adjustments">Adjustment</a> of -1 on all Brawn and Finesse Check rolls, including Attack Checks</li>
  <li><strong>Spellcasting Adjustment:</strong> <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/dice/#adjustments">Adjustment</a> to Savvy Check when casting any spell requiring gestures</li>
</ul>

<h5 id="armor">Armor</h5>
<p>Armor is worn on the body to reduce the damage sustained from incoming attacks. Non-magical armor has no effect on the attacker's chances to hit the defender&mdash;it only reduces damage.</p>

<div id="armor-table">
  {% include tables/summary-armor-table.html %}
</div>

<ul class="ftrm">
  <li><strong>Type:</strong> Listed armor types are representative; other types are possible</li>
  <li><strong>Category:</strong> All armor types fall into one of three categories:
    <ul class="bulleted">
      <li><em>Light:</em> Damage Adjustment 1 or 2; Brawn Minimum 5, 6 or 7</li>
      <li><em>Medium:</em> Damage Adjustment 3 or 4; Brawn Minimum 8, 9, or 10</li>
      <li><em>Heavy:</em> Damage Ajustment 5 or 6; Brawn Minimum 11 or more</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li><a href="#attack-hits">Damage Penalty:</a> The amount by which damage from incoming attacks is reduced by the defender's armor before it is deducted from his Hit Points.
  </li>
  <li><strong>Brawn Minimum:</strong> Minimum Brawn to wear the armor without penalty; for each point the character's Brawn is below the Brawn Minimum, he suffers the following penalties:
    <ul class="bulleted">
      <li><a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/dice/#modifying-dice">Modification</a> of -1 Die Rank to Finesse dice</li>
      <li><a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/dice/#adjustments">Adjustment</a> of -1 on all Brawn Check rolls, including Attack Checks</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
</ul>

<!--{% comment %}
<h5>Conditions</h5>
<p><strong>Conditions</strong> are adverse effects suffered due to accident, injury, or magical influence. They impact a hero's effectiveness in combat in a variety of ways, and may be of brief, extended, or permanent duration.</p>

{% include tables/condition-durations-table.html %}

<ul>
  <li><strong>Lasts:</strong> approximate duration of the condition during narrative (non-combat) play.</li>
  <li><strong>Removed:</strong> how the condition is removed during combat.</li>
</ul>
{% endcomment %}-->
