---
layout: rules-layout
title: actions
full-title: Actions and Movement
category: rules-core
description: "Action and movement rules in "
keywords: "rpg stats, rpg actions, rpg movement, rpg rules, tabletop rpg rules "
permalink: /core-rules/actions/
---

<p>Outside of combat, time and distance are controlled and narrated by the GM, following common sense and guidelines in the GM's section of these rules.</p>
<p id="actions-movement">In combat, the game is played with miniatures on a square or hex grid. The <span id="scale"><strong>Map Scale</strong></span> is either 5 feet per space, or 2 meters per space, whichever your group prefers. Time is measured in <strong>Turns, Phases</strong> and <strong>Rounds</strong>, which are brief but somewhat flexible units.</p>

<h5 id="turns">Turns and Phases</h5>
<p>Each Turn is made up of an <strong>Action Phase</strong> and a <strong>Reset Phase</strong>. All movement and other actions are made during the Action Phase, which is broken up into a variable number of rounds. The Reset Phase is an accounting step, in which temporary conditions are resolved and persistent conditions are updated.</p>

<h6 id="reset-phase">Reset Phase</h6>
<p>Combat always begins and ends with a Reset Phase. During the Reset Phase, the following steps are taken, in order:</p>
<ol>
  <li>Apply any <strong><span id="per-turn">per Turn</span></strong> effects, such as poison or bleeding</li>
  <li>Remove any <strong><span id="temporary">Temporary</span></strong> Conditions and Adjustments (which end at the conclusion of the Turn in which they were inflicted)</li>
  <li>Roll to remove any <strong><span id="persistent">Persistent</span></strong> Conditions (which end only if the character succeeds on the necessary <a href="#check-rolls">Check Roll</a>)</li>
  <li><strong><span id="recover">Recover</span></strong> 1 Mana Point <em>or</em> 1 Faith Point, player's choice</li>
  <li>
    Set Action Points (AP) and Free Steps for the coming Action Phase
    <ul class="bulleted circle">
      <li>Left-over Action Points and/or Free Steps from the preceeding Action Phase are lost</li>
      <li>Roll one <a href="#stat-dice">Finesse Die</a> for <a href="#action-points">Action Points</a>, and apply any adjustments</li>
      <li>Surprised characters receive <em>exactly</em> 1 Action Point in the first Reset Phase of a combat; afterwards, they roll for AP normally</li>
      <li>All characters receive a single <a href="#free-steps">Free Steps move</a> each turn</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>The current <a href="turns">Turn</a> ends, and play proceeds to the <a href="#action-phase">Action Phase</a> of the next Turn.</li>
</ol>

<h6 id="action-phase">Action Phase</h6>
<p>The Action Phase is divided into a series of <strong><span id="rounds">Rounds</span></strong>, in which each character has one opportunity to act by expending <a href="#action-points">Action Points</a>, according to the following rules:
<ul class="bulleted ftrm">
  <li>In each Round, characters act in descending order of <em>current</em> Action Points.</li>
  <li>Once per <a href="#turns">Turn</a>, a character may take <strong><span id="free-steps">Free Steps</span></strong> <em>before</em> performing any other <a href="#movements-table">Movement</a> or <a href="#actions-table">Action</a>.
    <ul class="bulleted circle">
      <li>The Free Step distance for medium-sized characters (humans, elves, orcs) is one or two spaces, which must be taken at once.</li>
      <li>The Free Step for small-sized characters (halflings, dwarves, goblins) is one space.</li>
      <li>Free Steps do not cost Action Points to use.</li>
      <li>A character doesn't have to <em>spend</em> Action Points in the Round he uses his Free Steps, but a character must <em>have</em> AP remaining in order to use his Free Steps.</li>
      <li>A character may take his Free Steps immediately before an <a href="#only-action">Only action</a>.</li>
      <li>Free Steps remaining at the end of the Turn are lost.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>In a single <a href="#rounds">Round</a>, a character may spend a total of no more than 3 <strong><span id="action-points">Action Points</span></strong> to perform one <a href="#movements-table">Movement</a> and/or one <a href="#actions-table">Action.</a>
    <ul class="bulleted circle">
      <li>Action Points are marked off the character sheet as they are spent.</li>
      <li>If a character has only 1 or 2 Action Points to spend in a Turn, he may spend <em>all</em> of his AP for the Turn to take an <strong><span id="only-action">Only</span></strong> action.</li>
      <li>When a character has expended all his Action Points, he may take no more actions until the next <a href="turns">Turn</a>.</li>
      <li>Certain <a href="#movements-table">Movements</a> and <a href="actions-table">Actions</a> may apply <a href="#temporary">Temporary Adjustments</a> to a character's attributes, especially <a href="defense-check">Defense</a>.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>A character may pass his opportunity to act in the current Round, saving his Action Points until a subsequent Round</li>
  <li>The <a href="#action-phase">Action Phase</a> ends when every character in the combat has either:
    <ul class="bulleted circle">
      <li>Expended all his Action Points, and has 0 AP remaining, or</li>
      <li>Has passed on his opportunity to act in the current Round</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>After the conclusion of the Action Phase, play proceeds to the <a href="#reset-phase">Reset Phase</a> for the current <a href="#turns">Turn</a>.</li>
</ul>

<div id="movements-table" class="ftrm">
  {% include tables/movements-table-core.html %}
</div>

<div id="actions-table" class="ftrm">
  {% include tables/actions-table-core.html %}
</div>


