---
layout: rules-layout
title: dice
full-title: Dice
category: rules-core
description: "Dice mechanics in "
keywords: "rpg stats, rpg dice, rpg rules, tabletop rpg rules "
permalink: /core-rules/dice/
---

<h5 id="die-rank">Die Ranks</h5>
<p>Dice in have a <strong>Die Rank</strong> (DR) equal to their number of sides. Thus, d6's have DR 6.</p>

<h5 id="dice-declaration">Dice declarations</h5>
<p>Die rolls are described in the following format: <strong><em>N</em>d<em>R</em></strong>, where <strong><em>N</em></strong> is the number of dice thrown, and <strong><em>R</em></strong> is the Die Rank, or number of sides on the die. <a href="#exploding-dice">Exploding dice</a> are indicated with an <strong>!</strong> at the end. Thus, a declaration of <strong>2d6</strong> means two six-sided dice, while <strong>2d8!</strong> indicates two <em>exploding</em> eight-sided dice.</p>
<p>Sometimes, an <span id="adjustments"><strong>Adjustment</strong></span> will be made to a die roll. In such cases, the number to be added to or subtracted from the roll will be included in the die declaration immediately following the number of sides. As such, <strong>2d4+1</strong> directs you to roll two 4-sided dice, and add 1 to the total, while <strong>1d12!-1</strong> declares that you roll one exploding 12-sided die, and subtract 1 from the result.</p>

<h5 id="roll-throw">Rolling the Dice vs. Throwing the Dice</h5>
<p>In these rules, a "throw" of the dice is the single, specific act of shaking a die (or dice) and dropping it (them) onto the table to randomly generate a single value. A die "roll," on the other hand, refers to the potentially multi-step process of using dice produce a final value, including any modifications, additions from any exploding dice, and adjustments. Thus, a single die <em>roll</em> may include one or more die <em>throws</em>, along with a little bit of algebra to factor in modifications and adjustments.</p>
<p>For example, a die <em>roll</em> calling for 2d4!+1 (two four-sided dice, exploding, plus one point) begins with a <em>throw</em> of two d4's, which turn up a 2 and a 4, for a subtotal of 6. Since these are exploding dice, however, the die showing the 4 is picked up and <em>thrown</em> again, this time showing another 4, and exploding again. The value of 4 is added to the running total, bringing it to 10, and that die is <em>thrown</em> again, this time turning up a 1, which brings the running total to 11. Since we're through <em>throwing</em> dice, we find the final result of the <em>roll</em> by adding in the adjustment of +1, for a final total of 12.</p>
<p>The distinction between die rolls and die throws is generally clear from context throughout the rules, so don't worry too much about it. But we did want to be clear that <em>Dungeons of Olde</em> does deliberately use these words to mean slightly different things.</p>

<h5 id="exploding-dice">Exploding Dice</h5>
<p>Many rolls in <em>Dungeons of Olde</em> are made with <em>exploding dice</em>. When throwing an exploding die, if the maximum value for a die is shown, its value is counted in the total for the roll, then the die is thrown again, and <em>that</em> value is also added to the total. The process is repeated until the die shows a result other than the maximum value.</p>
<p>For example, an exploding d8 is thrown and shows an 8, the maximum possible value. That 8 is counted as part of the total for the roll, and the die is thrown again, this time showing a 4. Since 4 is <em>not</em> the maximum value on a d8, the roll is now finished. The 4 on the second throw is added to the previous total of 8, for a final total of 12.</p>

<h5 id="odd-dice">Odd Dice</h5>
<p>When rolling a die with an odd-numbered <a href="#die-rank">Die Rank</a> (5, 7, 9, etc.), roll the next larger die, and count the maximum result as if it were the median (middle) result. For example, for a d7, roll a d8, and count any roll of "8" as if it were the median value of 4.</p>
<p>An odd die explodes when the named value of the die is thrown. That is, a d5 explodes when a "5" is thrown. Thus, when d5! is thrown, results of "1," "2," "3," and "4" are counted at their face value; a "6" is counted as a 3; and a "5" explodes, contributing 5 to the total and rolling again.</p>

<h5 id="adv-disadv">Advantage and Disadvantage</h5>
<p>Some die rolls are made with <strong>Advantage</strong> or <strong>Disadvantage</strong>. When rolling with Advantage, throw two dice and use the <em>more</em> favorable result. For Disadvantage, throw two dice and use the <em>less</em> favorable result. For rolls involving multiple dice, throw two full sets of dice, total each set separately, and use the more or less favorable result, as appropriate.</p>

<h5 id="modifying-dice">Modifying Stat Dice</h5>
<p>Some persistent conditions can <strong>Modify</strong> the <a href="#die-rank">Die Rank</a> of a given <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#stat-dice">Stat Die</a>. Modifications do not affect the value of the Stat itself, but affect all die rolls based on that Stat as long as the condition persists. Stat Die Modifications are applied before the dice are rolled, to each die thrown. For example, a hero with Brawn 8 contracts an illness that applies a Die Rank modifier of -2 to Brawn; until that illness is cured, he will have to roll his Modified Brawn dice, d6's, instead of his normal Brawn dice, which are d8's.</p>

