---
layout: rules-layout
title: skills
full-title: "Skills"
category: rules-core
description: "Skill rules for "
keywords: "rpg stats, rpg skills, rpg rules, tabletop rpg rules "
permalink: /core-rules/skills/
---


<p>Skills categorize and quantify a hero's training and experience. If a hero possesses a given skill, he rolls his normal <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#stats">Stat Dice</a> without adjustment when applying that skill to a <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/challenges/#challenges">challenge</a>. If he lacks the relevant skill, he usually rolls his Stat Dice with a penalty of -2 to the Check roll. A few skills are so rare or specialized that untrained characters are not allowed to attempt the task at all, depending on the circumstances.</p>

<h5>Purchasing Skills</h5>
<p>Skills are purchased and improved using <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#character-points">character points</a> (CP). To purchase a new skill at the basic level&mdash;Apprentice rank&mdash;costs 1 CP.  Additional <a href="#skill-ranks">skill ranks</a> may be purchased to improve a hero's competence with a skill. Groups of related skills can be purchased at a discount as <a href="skill-sets">Skill Sets</a>.</p>
<p>A few skills, including <strong>Alertness</strong>, <strong>Leap</strong>, and <strong>Lift/Shift</strong>, are considered <strong><span id="common-skills">Common Skills</span></strong>&mdash;every hero possesses each of these skills at the Apprentice rank at no cost in Character Points.</p>

{% include tables/skills-table.html %}

<h5 id="skill-ranks">Skill Ranks</h5>
<p>Skills may be improved beyond their basic level. Each skill rank above the basic level affords the hero a bonus on his <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/challenges/#check-rolls">Check rolls</a> using that skill.</p>

{% include tables/skill-ranks-table.html %}

<ul>
  <li><strong>Total Cost:</strong> The cost in Character Points to buy the listed skill rank all at once, at the time of character creation</li>
  <li><strong>Upgrade Cost:</strong> The cost in CP to buy that rank if the character has already purchased the preceding Rank.</li>
</ul>

<h5 id="skill-sets">Skill Sets</h5>
<p>Most skills are included in one or more Skill Sets. Purchasing a Skill Set at the listed price gains the hero every skill in the set at a discount over buying each skill separately.</p>

<p>Skills in a Set also improve together. For each Skill Set, the Skill Sets table lists a <em>Number for Rank</em> value. When a hero improves that many Skills within the Set to a given Rank, the remaining Skills in the Set also improve to that Rank at no additional cost. For example, Melee Weapons Set has a <em>Number for Rank</em> of 3. As soon as a hero improves his third skill in the <strong>Melee Weapon Set</strong> to Journeyman rank, <em>all</em> his Melee Weapon Skills immediately improve to Journeyman rank.</p>

<p>A few skills, such as <strong>Ride</strong>, are included in more than one Skill Set. In such cases, the overlap does not reduce the cost to purchase either Skill Set at the Apprentice rank. Additional ranks in such "overlap skills" <em>do</em>, however, count toward the <em>Number for Rank</em> to rank-up both Skill Sets.</p>

<p>The Character Point cost of a Skill Set including a <a href="#common-skills">common skill</a> is not discounted in any way. Additional ranks in Common Skills <em>do</em>, however, count toward the <em>Number for Rank</em> to rank-up the entire Skill Set.</p>

{% include tables/skill-sets-table.html %}

<h5 class="hdrm-more">Skill Packages</h5>
<p>Every character created under the Core Rules for <em>Dungeons of Olde</em> chooses a <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#skill-packages">Skill Package</a>&mdash;a collection of related skills  suitable to a traditional role within an adventuring company. The optional <strong>Crunchy Characters</strong> rules afford players the option to choose their skills a la carte using a point-based system, tailoring their heroes to their unique visions. Nonetheless, a character built with a Core-Rules <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/core-rules/characters/#stats">Stat Array</a> and Skill Package is balanced with characters created under the Crunchy Characters system, so there is no danger in allowing some players to create customized characters while others choose Stats and Skills under the Core Rules.</p>
<p>Skill Packages are balanced to cost 10 CP each. While it would be possible for experienced heroes to save up 10 CP to buy an entire Skill Package at once, there is no benefit in doing so. In fact, because there is often significant overlap between Skill Packages, an experienced hero who already has one Package likely already has some of the Skills included in the new Package. For these reasons, a player who wants to "multi-class" his Core-Rules hero by purchasing a second Skill Package should simply buy the necessary Skills or Skill Sets as he can afford them, and let his hero branch out gradually.</p>

