---
layout: rules-section-layout
title: Stats
category: rules-stats
---

## Primary Stats

Characters are defined by four Primary Stats: **Brawn, Cunning, Savvy,** and **Nerve**.

**Brawn** measures the character’s physical prowess; think “strength.” Lunk is a Barbarian—a big, hairy, axe-wielding warrior; he’ll want a high Brawn stat.

**Cunning** rates the character’s quickness, accuracy, and flair; think “dexterity” or “agility.” Keen is a nimble and cagey rogue, light on her feet and quick with a blade; she needs lots of Cunning.

**Savvy** quantifies the character’s mental abilities—reasoning power and general knowledge; think “intelligence” or “wisdom.” Audacia is a clever mage, almost as brilliant as she thinks she is; her main stat is Savvy.

**Nerve** measures the character’s courage, strength of will, or conviction; it’s equal parts “charisma,” “presence,” and “will-power.” Fustus is a devout priest of an over-involved god, giving him plenty of Nerve.

### Stat values and dice

For Heroes, Primary Stats can range from 3 to 10; for non-player characters, they can be as low as 1 or as high as 12 (or perhaps higher, in the case of truly powerful monsters). The character’s value for each stat determines what sort of dice he rolls when attempting an attack or other difficult task, as shown in the Stat Dice table.

An average, ordinary, non-heroic human being has about a 4 for his or her Primary Stats. Heroes are above average by definition, so even beginning heroes have above-average stats. The average Primary Stat for a beginning hero is 6, although few heroes have straight 6s across the board. Usually, one or two of a hero’s stats will be in the 7-10 range, while others will be closer to a more “normal” 4 or 5. Rarely will a hero have a Primary Stat below 4—values that low leave a hero vulnerable to calamities that even ordinary folk can usually avoid, like tripping over their own shoelaces in the middle of a boss fight.

### Stats and Dice Table
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Stat value</th>
    <th>Check dice</th>
    <th>Effect die</th>
    <th></th>
    <th>Stat value</th>
    <th>Check dice</th>
    <th>Effect die</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>2d2</td>
    <td>1d2</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>2d3</td>
    <td>1d3</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>13</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>2d4</td>
    <td>1d4</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>14</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>15</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>2d2</td>
    <td>1d2</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>16</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>2d3</td>
    <td>1d3</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>2d4</td>
    <td>1d4</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>19</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>2d2</td>
    <td>1d2</td>
    <td> </td>
    <td>20</td>
    <td>2d2-1</td>
    <td>1d2-1</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Secondary Stats

Characters also have two Secondary Stats, each of which is based upon two Primary Stats. The value of each Secondary Stat is equal to the higher of the two Primary Stats it’s based on, plus half of the other one, rounded down.

For example, a Secondary Stat that matters to every character is Hit Points, which sets how much damage the character can survive before he is overcome by his injuries. A character’s Hit Points are determined his Brawn and Nerve. Lunk the Barbarian has a Brawn of 9 and a Nerve of 6, so he gets 12 hit points (9 + 6/2 = 12). His associate, Fustus, is a stubborn old friar, with Brawn 5 and Nerve 8. Fustus has 11 Hit Points (9 + 5/2 = 11.5, which rounds to 11).

**Hit Points** determine how much damage a character can absorb, as mentioned above. Hit Points are based on Brawn and Nerve.

**Mana Points** determine how much magical or divine energy the character can channel into spells or prayers. Mana Points are based on Savvy and Nerve.

## Modifying Stats
Certain circumstances may change a Primary or Secondary Stat from its base value for all purposes, including the determination of Check and Effect dice. When this happens, the Stat is said to have been Modified. One of the most common Stat Modifiers in the game is the penalty to Cunning imposed by wearing armor, although other conditions—especially gear, magical items and spells—may also bestow a bonus or penalty that Modifies a Stat.

Before embarking on a dungeon raid, Friar Fustus dons a suit of leather armor. Fustus’s Brawn of 5 is not sufficient to wear this armor without penalty. According to the rules for Armor (see the Combat section for details), that penalty Modifies Fustus’s Cunning stat, reducing it by 1. His base Cunning of 6 is reduced to a 5 for all purposes, as long as he wears that leather armor. Even his dice are based on his Modified Cunning—he now rolls 2d4+1 for Checks, and 1d4+1 for Effect, until he removes that armor.

