---
layout: rules-layout
title: effects
full-title: Effects
category: rules-Stats
---

As mentioned previously, a character rolls Check Dice to determine whether or not he manages to do something. Once he’s succeeded, he may need to roll his Effect Die to see how well he did it. Effect rolls come up most frequently when determining damage done by a successful attack against an opposing character in a fight, but they may be called for in other, less-violent circumstances as well.

For example, Fustus the Friar intends to bestow a +1 Blessing upon his companions at the beginning of a battle. After he succeeds at a Nerve Check to perform the Blessing, the rules for the prayer instruct him to make a Nerve Effect roll to determine how many of his allies actually receive the benefit. His Nerve is 8, so he rolls 1d8 for Effect; he throws a 5, so the Blessing affects Fustus himself, and up to 4 companions.

## Adjusting Effect rolls
Effect rolls may be Adjusted, just like Check rolls, if circumstances impact the effectiveness of the character’s Attempt. For example, if Lunk needs to chop his way through a locked door (what is it with Lunk and doors, anyway?), he’ll need to do damage to the door’s Hit Points until he’s destroyed it. Since the door’s just standing there, not attempting to defend itself, hitting it squarely enough to damage it is an Easy Challenge. Lunk has no trouble rolling 6 or better on the Brawn Check to connect. (All axes roll Brawn Checks to hit.) Now he has to inflict damage on the door, so he rolls his Brawn Effect die, 1d8, and gets a 4. Fortunately, Lunk is still benefitting from Blessing of Effect Fustus cast in the last example, so Lunk gets a +1 Adjustment to his Effect roll to damage the door. This raises the damage done by Lunk’s chop from 4 to 5. He’s not quite through the door’s 8 Hit Points yet, but it will go faster with that Blessing than it would have were Lunk hacking through without the favor of the gods.