---
layout: rules-layout
title: reset phase
full-title: Reset Phase
category: rules-action
description: "Rules for the Reset Phase of Crisis Mode turns in "
keywords: "reset phase, rpg actions, rpg combat, tabletop rpg rules, "
---

{% include outdated-warning.html %}

After all characters have completed their actions in the Action Phase, either by spending all their Action Points or by passing in the final Round of the Action Phase, the players conclude the turn by performing the Reset Phase. During the Reset Phase, any end-of-turn adjustments are made to character stats, the duration of any multi-turn magic or effects is decremented, and all characters roll their Finesse Effect die to set their Action Points for the next turn. Once all this business is done, the Action Phase of the next turn can begin.

## Remove "until Reset" adjustments
The first step in the Reset business for a character is to remove any adjustments labeled "until Reset" she incurred due to her own or other characters' Actions in the preceding Action Phase. This is done by shifting the tracking counter on the character's track for the affected back to its starting position&mdash;usually 0.

For example, Fustus moves two steps and makes a Rushed Attack against a hobgoblin in the first Round. The Rushed Attack gives Fustus a "-1 to Defense until Reset", so it affects him throughout the remainder of the current Action Phase. Fustus' player immediately pushes the counter on his Defense track from 0 to -1. This reminds Fustus' player that the cleric takes a -1 on all his Defense rolls for the rest of the turn. When the current Action Phase ends, and the Reset Phase begins, Fustus' player can remove that -1 to Defense until Reset by moving the counter on his Defense track back up to 0.

## Decrement duration of long-term effects
_Text to come_

## Reset Action Points and Free Steps
The last order of Reset business for a character is to set Action Points and Free Steps for the coming Action Phase. To do this, the player rolls his character's Modified Finesse Effect die, applies any adjustments for spells, magical items, or other special conditions currently affecting the character, and moves the counter on his Action Point track to show the result. For example, Keen has a Modified Finesse of 9, so she's throwing 1d8+1 Finesse Effect die for her Action Points. She rolls a 4 on the d8, +1, for a net roll of 5. But she's also under the effect of a Potion of the Zephyr, which gives her a +1 Adjustment to AP, so her total AP for the next turn will be 6. She moves the counter on her AP track to 6.

To reset her Free Steps, she simply flips the AP tracking counter back to green-side-up. The green side reminds Keen's player that she hasn't taken her Free Steps in the next turn; when she does use them, she'll flip the counter to red-side-up.

Note that unused Action Points and Free Steps may not be carried over from one turn to the next. The fact that a character has some unspent AP from the previous Action Phase, or never took her Free Steps, does not in any way affect her total AP or Free Steps in the next turn's Action Phase.

